---
layout: default
nav_order: 4
title: CENSO
has_children: true
permalink: page/censo
toc: false
---
# {{page.title}}
{: .no_toc}

The Commandline ENergetic SOrting of Conformer Rotamer Ensembles (CENSO) software allows the DFT/WFT refinment of conformer ensembles.
It is build modularly and contains these parts:

1. Prescreening: A cheap DFT method is used to sort out energetically high conformers. Solvation can optionally be used via ALPB/GBSA. No thermo corrections.
2. Screening: Sorting the ensemble with a more costly method including SMD/COSMO-RS solvation contributions. Optionally thermo corrections with SPH.
3. (Geometry-)Optimization: Reoptimization of the ensemble structures including a new sorting
4. Refinement: High-level single-point energies for precise sorting.

Additionally, NMR and UV/Vis spectra can be computed for the final ensemble.

{% include note.html content='CENSO requires access to DFT/WFT methods. Thus, **ORCA** or **Turbomole** are required in addition to **xtb**.'%}

The original published CENSO v1 comes as a python program, while with CENSO v2, also a python interface is available.
Both censo programs are controlled via a input file, usually called `censorc`. A censo computation can be invoked with:

```bash
censo -inprc <input file>
```

{% include note.html content='If no input file is provided when calling the program, censo will try to use the `.censorc` file in your home directory.'%}

A default input file can be generated by calling `censo --new-config`. A detailed list of settings can be found in the [documentation](https://xtb-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/CENSO_docs/censorc.html).

## Literature
- **CENSO ||** Grimme, Stefan, Fabian Bohle, Andreas Hansen, Philipp Pracht, Sebastian Spicher, and Marcel Stahn. "Efficient quantum chemical calculation of structure ensembles and free energies for nonrigid molecules." 
[*The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 125*, **2021**, *19*, 4039-4054.](https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.1c00971)
{: .fs-6 .fw-300 }

